update: improve docs and adapt to work (#51)
babylonlabs-io/rollup-finality-gadget: docs/ALGORITHM.md

# Finality Quorum Calculation Algorithm

## Table of Contents

1. [Overview](#1-overview)  
2. [Inputs and Data Sources](#2-inputs-and-data-sources)  
3. [Step‑by‑Step Algorithm](#3-step-by-step-algorithm)

---

## 1. Overview

The Finality Gadget determines if a rollup block is finalized by 
checking if a quorum of voting power has signed the block. This 
involves fetching votes from the contract, calculating each 
provider’s voting power, and comparing the total voted power to 
the required threshold (> 2/3).

---

## 2. Inputs and Data Sources

1. Rollup blocks  
   - Fetch height, hash, and timestamp from the rollup chain  
2. Finality Providers  
   - Fetch FP public keys from the Babylon chain  
3. Voting Power  
   - Calculate FP voting power via Bitcoin delegation data at the 
     specific BTC block height  
4. Quorum Threshold  

>    - Hardcoded as 2/3 of total voting power  

Reviewer: I think we can divide this section into two, one for data source and the other for input. 

- The data source include Babylon Genesis (and the rollup contract), a rollup full node, and a Bitcoin full node.
- The input is only a single rollup block, and the algorithm would have a signature like `func is_btc_staking_finalized(block)`. It is finality gadget's responsibility to run this algorithm for every block. Within this list, 
  - Finality providers and their voting power are fetched from Babylon through the given rollup block
  - Quorum threshold 2/3 is a constant

---

## 3. Step‑by‑Step Algorithm

1. **Fetch activation parameters**  
   Read `bsn_activation_height` and `finality_signature_interval` from the Rollup BSN contract.

2. **Determine start block**  
   ```pseudo
   if currentBlockHeight < bsn_activation_height:
       currentBlockHeight = bsn_activation_height

>    ```

Reviewer: Actually if `currentBlockHeight < bsn_activation_height`, the algorithm can simply return because this block is not "finalise-able". Wdyt?

3. **Align to signature interval**  
   Advance to the next block that satisfies  
   ```pseudo
   (currentBlockHeight - bsn_activation_height) % finality_signature_interval == 0
   ```

> 4. **Fetch validator public keys**  
>    Get the list of all registered FPs (validator public keys) from Babylon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **Fetch FP public keys**  
   Get the list of all registered FPs' public keys from Babylon.
```

5. **Map timestamp → BTC height**  
   Use your Bitcoin client to find the BTC block whose timestamp matches the L2 block’s timestamp.

> 6. **Compute each validator’s voting power**  
>    For each FP:  
>    1. Query Babylon for active delegations at that BTC height.  
>    2. Sum up shares → `votingPower[FP]`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. **Compute each FP's voting power**  
   For each FP:  
   1. Query Babylon for active delegations at that BTC height.  
   2. Sum up shares → `votingPower[FP]`
```

Also, note that 

- if the FP does not have a timestamped pub rand at the given height, then its voting power should be 0
- if the FP is not allow-listed at the given height, then its voting power should be 0
